---
conversion date: 2025-08-13
id: c-gasser
images:
  - src: /images/nolan-gasser.jpg
    alt: c-gasser
    width: 150
    height: 212
publication:
  date: 2002-05-24
  publisher: ANG Newspapers Classical Music Column
title: Cheryl North Interviews Nolan Gasser
type: interview
tags:
  - Orchestra
  - Premiere
  - Symphony
  - Solo
  - Concert
  - Festival

---
I see a small but potent ray of hope attempting to pierce through the gloom clouding the world's 21st-century horizon.

 Yes — even amid all the seemingly endless strife in the Middle East, the dark unknowns of predicted global climate change and the looming threats of resource shortages — I see reasons for optimism.

 Here's why.

 During a telephone conversation last week, Petaluma-based composer Nolan Gasser uttered the golden words, "I believe that a good composer should be able to connect with his audience and what's important to them. I want to be able to speak to them where they live!"

 Wow. What would early- and mid-20th century composers like Webern, Varese and Stockhausen have said to that? Composers like Mozart, Haydn, Beethoven, Schumann, Chopin and their ilk would be broadly smiling at Gasser's words.

 Gasser is the composer responsible for *Black Suit Blues*, the main event on the Oakland East Bay Symphony's program tonight at the Paramount Theatre in Oakland.

 So, why does this all send shivers of delight through my psyche?

 Here goes:

 The Arts, with a capital A, have customarily been quite prophetic, or at the very least, reflective, of the times in which they are, or were, created. Germanic literature has a term for this phenomenon: "Zeitgeist," which translates as "spirit of the times."

 Besides hosting two bloody world wars and countless revolutions and atrocities, the past century reflected a Zeitgeist that spawned a fragmented, abstract painting style with few humanistic references, as well as a spate of angular, impersonal glass-and-steel "modern" architecture.

 The dominant literature of the times was similarly grounded in objective, abstract ideas, as 19th-century Romantic and humanistic narrative fell by the wayside with works such as T.S. Eliot's fragmented *Wasteland* and pieces that followed.

 And what became of the so-called serious, "classical" music?

 It became mathematical, fragmented and atonal — and was often more interesting on the paper score or in theory books than it was when falling on human ears. From its former happy home in the hearts of the people, so-called concert music retreated to the remote ivory towers of academia.

 But, according to Gasser, "I think music should have a narrative thread in it that can take the audience from point A to point B. This 'narration' should point to and frame some outstanding, important moment in the music."


 Gasser, who has his doctorate in medieval and Renaissance music from Stanford University, explained that Black Suit Blues* is his musical setting of a poem by Robert Trent Jones Jr. that refers to Martin Luther King's final speeches, his assassination and its immediate aftermath.

 "In setting Jones' text," Gasser said, "I fashioned a detailed story line that begins with a brief fanfare foreshadowing a central motive of the work, which is eventually sung by the chorus. While the piece features a baritone solo voice, it is actually the tenor saxophone that musically symbolizes the voice and spirit of Dr. King."

 The opening sax solo includes a textless setting of several passages spoken by Dr. King during his final sermon, given at the Mason Temple in Memphis, Tenn., on the eve of his assassination. The final sentence of the sax "sermon" musically quotes the opening line of the *Battle Hymn of the Republic.* But just before the final word, "Lord," a symbolic gunshot breaks off the sax song, which, in turn, leads to an intense and dissonant passage rife with "screams" in the chorus and general chaos in the orchestra.

 The chaos subsides and the chorus segues into the text of Jones' *Black Suit Blues*, beginning with the line, "Wanna go home and burn my black suit" (the black suit is the mourning suit worn to funerals). The mourning needs to stop as the poet admonishes, "Don't sink into a sea of despair/Pray with me and I'll be there/And we will overcome."

 According to Gasser, it is about this point in the work when the spirit of Dr. King, embodied in the reaffirming voice of the tenor saxophone, is revived to join in the hymn being sung by the chorus and the grief-stricken young observer, portrayed by the baritone.

 Gasser actually used a device, common within the Renaissance Mass cycle, utilizing the somewhat slow, fermata-held chords that customarily accompanied the affirming lines, "Ex Maria Virgine" and "Jesu Christe."

 The *Black Suit Blues* piece is just one of four segments that Gasser and Jones are writing to epitomize the essential spirit of the United States.
 "Our idea is to create a cycle for large musical forces, using four of the quintessentially "American" holidays as reference points: July 4, Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving."

 The July 4 segment has already had its critically acclaimed premiere with the Charleston Symphony, featuring Sam Waterston as its narrator during the Spoleto Festival. *Black Suit Blues* was appropriately premiered by the Memphis Symphony last year. The just-completed "Memorial Day" segment, featuring orchestra, chorus, mezzo-soprano, violin, trumpet and bagpipes, is set to be premiered on Memorial Day weekend by the Arkansas Symphony at the Riverfest Festival, with General Wesley Clarke introducing the piece to an anticipated audience of 25,000.

 Gasser hopes that the completed cycle, amounting to about an hour of music, will become a chronicle of the American experience.

 "But," he added, "it's not just all flag-waving. It's really questioning who we are and what are our responsibilities as Americans, including, as Ben Franklin said, to question our leaders through the difficulty of wars and the difficulty of our own past with civil rights and race issues, and ending with the gratitude and brotherhood of Thanksgiving.

 "Perhaps it will someday be sort of an American 'Ode to Joy.'"

 Maestro Michael Morgan will conduct the OEBS and the Oakland Symphony Chorus, with Lynne Morrow as music director, in *Black Suit Blues* at 8 tonight at the Paramount Theatre, 2025 Broadway, Oakland. Soloists will be Robert Sims, baritone, and David Henderson, tenor saxophone.

 Other works on the program will be the Prelude and Liebestod from Wagner's *Tristan und Isolde* and Schubert's *Symphony No. 9*, "The Great."


Nolan Gasser at the piano with colleagues for his Christmas Carol [Christmas by the Bay](http://www.christmasbythebay.com/song/index.html)*: lyricist Clark Sterling and singer Tim Hockenberry.


Lyricist Robert Trent Jones, Jr. and Nolan Gasser, in New Mexico.

