---
conversion date: 2025-08-13
id: c-gasser
images:
  - src: /images/bob-jones-and-nolan-gasser-in-nm.jpg
    alt: Cheryl North Interviews Nolan Gasser
publication:
  date: 2009-01-16
  publisher: ANG Newspapers Classical Music Column
title: World Concerto Premiere - Cheryl North Interviews Nolan Gasser
type: interview
tags:
  - Orchestra
  - Premiere
  - Symphony
  - Solo
  - Concert
  - Festival

---


The Oakland East Bay Symphony's upcoming concert, dubbed by its organizers *A Global Celebration*, can almost serve as a metaphor for our national identity -- e pluribus unum.

 Scheduled for 8 p.m. Jan 23 at the Paramount Theater in Oakland, with a repeat performance at 8 p.m. Jan. 24 at the Conservatory of Music in San Francisco, the highlight of the concert will be the World Premiere of Bay Area composer Nolan Gasser's *World Concerto for Cello and Orchestra*, with Israeli-born Maya Beiser as its primary soloist.

 Petaluma resident Nolan Gasser, who has his doctorate in medieval and Renaissance music from Stanford University, has been providing some significant thrusts into the contemporary music world lately. His NASA-commissioned *GLAST Prelude* for Brass Quintet accompanied the launch of the Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST) at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida last June 11 and his *American Festivals*, composed to a poetic libretto by Robert Trent Jones Jr., received its rousing world premiere in July, 2008 as the opening event of Napa Valley's *Festival del Sole.*

 Gasser's musical style has strong ear appeal to modern sensibilities and the 21st century Zeitgeist. During a telephone conversation we had a few months back, he told me that he definitely strives to connect with his audience and to address things that are important to them.

 "I want to be able to speak to them (his audiences) where they live!" he stressed.

 In addition to his background in Medieval and Renaissance music, he is a master of jazz, pop music, music for the stage, and music written in a solidly classical style. While his *World Concerto for Cello and Orchestra* utilizes the classical three-movement symphonic concerto format, Gasser incorporates diverse elements of eastern and western music in into its structure.

 Another significant commission is a work Gasser is calling *Cosmic Reflections*, a three-movement symphony for full orchestra scheduled to premiere in October 2009 at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C.

 Beiser, who has been called "a cello goddess" by no less an erudite publication as *The New Yorker* magazine, has gained fame and acclaim for musical virtuosity as well as her daring performance style. She has commissioned new works from some of the world's leading composers, including Tan Dun, Brian Eno, Osvaldo Golijov, Philip Glass and more.

 In addition to Beiser, there are other glamorous and/or exotic performer-soloists whose talents will be featured in Gasser's new work. One of these is the petite but powerful Erhu virtuoso Jiebing Chen, who was born on mainland China and whose life story could provide a perfect script for a rip-roaring movie epic.

 Her family, headed by her history professor father, was ordered to a "re-education camp" during China's infamous 1966 Cultural Revolution purge of its intellectuals. While in the camp, he took the dangerous risk of continuing the music education of his five children.

 Tiny Jiebing was especially talented and progressed rapidly. Four years later, when recruiters for the Chinese Navy conducted auditions for the military's elite performing arts groups, little Jiebing, who at nine years of age was too young to try out, insisted upon being heard.

 After she had played only a few measures on her Ehu, a two-stringed violin-like instrument, the astonished officials agreed to make her a member of the military, thus changing her family's formerly grim situation. Eventually, she graduated from the Shanghai Academy of Music, became an instrumental soloist with the Shanghai Opera Company, and in 1989, won a scholarship to further study music at the State University of New York in Buffalo. After earning honors there, she moved to the Bay Area, which she now considers her "home."

 Another of these unique world performers will be Aruna Narayan Kalle, who was born in Mumbai, India. Kalle has the distinction of not only being one of the few existing virtuosos of the dauntingly difficult Sarangi (an ancient bowed North Indian lute-like instrument), she is the only woman to do so professionally. One of the Sarangi's unusual characteristics is that it combines both melodic strings which are actually bowed, along with a set of sympathetic strings, which are not actually played, but rather vibrate in "sympathy" with the bowed strings.

 A third exotic instrument Gasser has employed in his new world work will be the Arabic Oud, a fretless 11-stringed, plucked instrument that resembles a lute. It will be played by the Lebanese-born composer, conductor, and instrumentalist Bassam Saba, one of the major figures working in classical Arabic music today, and a participant in the Silk Road Project championed by cellist Yo-Yo Ma.


