---
conversion date: 2025-08-13
id: c-gasser
images:
  - src: /images/nolan-gasser-2.jpg
    alt: Cheryl North Interviews Nolan Gasser
publication:
  date: 2008-08-15
  publisher: ANG Newspapers Classical Music Column
title: Music's Man on the Move
type: interview
tags:
  - Orchestra
  - Premiere
  - Symphony
  - Solo
  - Concert
  - Festival

---

Armed with a Ph.D. in medieval and Renaissance music from Stanford University, rising young composer Nolan Gasser\** has been providing some significant thrust into the music vs. words debate lately. His NASA-commissioned *GLAST Prelude\* for brass quintet accompanied the launch of the Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST) at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida last June 11.

However, his latest piece, American Festivals, might have the potential to become our own home-grown, thoroughly colloquial ode to joy. A joint effort of Gasser and librettist-poet Robert Trent Jones Jr., the work received its rousing world premiere in July at the opening event of Napa Valley's Festival del Sole.

Described as a symphonic oratorio, each of its four movements — "Independence Day," "Memorial Day," "Martin Luther King Jr. Day" and "Thanksgiving" — includes words imaginatively set for full orchestra, chorus, soloists and/or orator.

However, according to Gasser, his intention was to go further than perfunctory flag-waving, by relating to the people and problems of our own times.

"The words," he says, "explore our national identity as well as our responsibilities as Americans — including, as Ben Franklin said, questioning our leaders through the difficulty of wars and civil rights and race issues." The massive indoor and outdoor Festival del Sole audience reacted with exuberant cheers, whoops and lengthy applause to the piece's premiere performance. Gasser's music brilliantly related to the poetry with relevant, inventive references such as an evocation of the pealing of the Liberty Bell on its original pitch of E-flat; the use of a tenor saxophone playing a sometimes bluesy but ultimately inspiring theme to represent Martin Luther King; intricate counterpoint passages recalling early liturgical music; the use of the haunting Native American flute, mourning bagpipes, and appealing snippets of familiar tunes and hymns reminiscent of the style of Charles Ives.

His latest commission is to create a piece he's calling Cosmic Reflections, a major three-movement symphony for full orchestra scheduled to premiere in October 2009 at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C.

---

Nolan Gasser's GLAST Prelude received mention in the [July 11, 2008 issue of Science](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/321/5886/183b). Further information can be found at [nolangasser.com](http://www.nolangasser.com/glastprelude.html).
